---
date: 2025-09-09
---

# self induced lung injury SILI can occur because of large inspiratory tidal volume

- related: [[ICU intensive care unit]]
- tags: #literature #icu
---

<!-- how does high tidal volume during spontaneous breathing cause lung injury? b:557736186878-->

It has become clear that excessive tidal and maximal inflations (dynamic and static strain) on the alveolar tissue can induce injury even when generated largely by spontaneous efforts (self-induced lung injury SILI). However, the pattern of injury may be different in the presence of spontaneous effort as compared with controlled positive pressure mechanical breaths. Positive airway pressure distributes gas according to regional lung mechanics and against a passive diaphragm that moves preferentially in nondependent lung regions. In contrast, spontaneous efforts lead to more uniform contraction of the diaphragm and more even distribution of pleural pressure changes. Thus, while global transalveolar pressures may be similar during spontaneous or full machine breaths, regional transalveolar pressures may vary considerably in spontaneously breathing patients, especially those with marked heterogeneity of lung injury.

The distributional effects of spontaneous efforts can be beneficial in improving ventilation-perfusion matching in milder forms of lung injury. Diaphragm activity can also forestall diaphragm atrophy (VIDD). However, in more severe lung injury, these distributional efforts can also produce pendelluft (intrapulmonary gas movement among units with differing time constants). This can lead to significant tidal recruitment and local overstretch of the involved dependent region as well as rapid deflation of the corresponding nondependent region. Importantly, this may occur without causing a significant change in overall tidal volume. Vigorous inspiratory efforts can have other negative effects as well. Excessive tidal volumes can produce air trapping if the respiratory rate is too rapid to allow for complete emptying between breaths, which contributes to further alveolar overdistention. The accompanying increased diaphragm stimulation with vigorous efforts, especially in the presence of ventilator-patient asynchronies, can lead to respiratory muscle fatigue and injury. Finally, the increase in transmural pulmonary vascular pressure swings caused by inspiratory efforts may worsen vascular leakage. Inadequate PEEP can contribute to SILI through regional atelectasis that produces cyclic alveolar opening/collapse injury during tidal volume delivery. Vigorous efforts in the presence of negative regional expiratory transalveolar pressures from ==inadequate applied PEEP can further worsen this injury==. Alveolar collapse also can increase respiratory drive, create large negative intra-alveolar pressures that can draw edema fluid into these alveoli, and subsequently worsen the heterogeneity of injury.

The decision to sedate (or even paralyze) a patient such as this one to reduce potentially harmful excessive efforts involves tradeoffs. One point is sedation will conceptually reduce the risk of SILI. Another point is sedation may delay the ventilator liberation process. Data to help guide this decision are scant. However, the recent notion of ==using driving pressure== (DP = plateau pressure − PEEP) ==as an indicator of lung injury risk== may help here. Observational studies have suggested a threshold of <13 to 19 cm H2O might be “safe.” The fact that this patient has a DP of only 8 cm H2O associated with the larger tidal volumes (13 − 5 cm H2O) might reassure you that suppression of patient efforts is not indicated.[^1][^2][^3][^4][^5][^6]

[^1]: [[SEEK Questionnaires]]
[^2]: Brochard L, Slutsky A, Pesenti A. Mechanical ventilation to minimize progression of lung injury in acute respiratory failure. _Am J Respir Crit Care Med_. 2017;195(4):438-442. [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27626833)
[^3]: Yoshida T, Amato MBP, Kavanagh BP. Understanding spontaneous vs. ventilator breaths: impact and monitoring. _Intensive Care Med_. 2018;44(12):2235-2238. [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29574574)
[^4]: Yoshida T, Fujino Y, Amato MB, et al. Fifty years of research in ARDS. Spontaneous breathing during mechanical ventilation. Risks, mechanisms, and management. _Am J Respir Crit Care Med_. 2017;195(8):985-992. [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27786562)
[^5]: Yoshida T, Roldan R, Beraldo MA, et al. Spontaneous effort during mechanical ventilation: maximal injury with less positive end-expiratory pressure. _Crit Care Med_. 2016;44(8):e678-688. [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27002273)
[^6]: Yoshida T, Uchiyama A, Matsuura N, et al. Spontaneous breathing during lung-protective ventilation in an experimental acute lung injury model: high transpulmonary pressure associated with strong spontaneous breathing effort may worsen lung injury. _Crit Care Med_. 2012;40(5):1578-1585.
