---
date: 2025-09-20
---

# use bronchoscopy to advance ET if concern of cuff leak with high ET tube

- related: [[ICU intensive care unit]]
- tags: #literature #icu
---

<!-- cuff leak with inflated cuff causes, how to manage? b:1283925023448-->

This patient has had recurrent leakage of air around the ET tube, often called a ==cuff leak==, and demonstration radiographically of a ==high ET tube position== (Figure 2, arrow). This agitated patient with a malpositioned ET tube is at ==high risk of suffering accidental extubation==. Having previously undergone difficult ET intubation, ==loss of airway control== could have devastating consequences. Using a ==flexible bronchoscope to inspect the ET tube== and its position within the patient's trachea (and at or above the vocal cords) can confirm the current position and facilitate safe ET tube repositioning as the best approach among the options (choice D is correct). Following confirmation of the ET tube position, the bronchoscope can be advanced well into the trachea and used as a guidewire over which the ET tube (with cuff deflated) is safely advanced into a proper position with the tip 3 to 6 cm above the carina.

As many as 10% of endotracheally intubated ICU patients develop evidence of loss of air around the ET tube during positive pressure ventilation—cuff leak. The audible leak may be the result of a ==damaged cuff or tubing and pilot balloon==. ==More commonly==, cuff leaks are the result of ==cephalad migration of the ET tube== into the ==widened subglottic region== of the trachea or ==near the level of the vocal cords==. Additional mechanisms for cuff leak include ==cuff underinflation==, ==insertion of an enteral tube past the cuff into the lungs==, ==tracheomalacia==, and delivery of ==ventilation with excessively high airway pressures==. Since the patient's ET tube is confirmed radiographically to be at a very high position (Figure 2, arrow), ==merely deflating the cuff and advancing the ET tube blindly carries high risk of loss of airway==, particularly problematic in this “difficult airway” patient (choice B is incorrect). An inflated cuff helps to keep the ET tube in a midline position even if the tip is at or above the level of the vocal cords. ==Deflation of the cuff eliminates this anchoring== and increases the likelihood that advancing the tube blindly will be lateral to the vocal cords or into the esophagus with loss of airway control.

Inserting a suction catheter, bronchoscope, or airway exchange catheter (AEC) through the ET tube and into the distal trachea can help to maintain the ET tube near the midline as the cuff is deflated. It is not surprising that addition of air to the ET tube cuff temporarily eliminated the leak, particularly if the ET tube has migrated cephalad into the ==proximal trachea or subglottic space==, which has a ==larger diameter than the distal trachea==. A useful visual image for the proximal and distal trachea is that of a funnel on top of a cylinder. ==Further inflation== of the cuff can ==promote additional cephalad migration and leak recurrence==, which is likely the case in this patient. It is worth considering that a large volume of air may have accumulated in the high-volume low-pressure ET tube cuff following repeated additional inflations, thus a large volume of air should be evacuated from the cuff before one concludes that the cuff is actually torn. In this case, the high ET tube position noted on the chest radiograph makes cephalad migration much more likely than a torn cuff and should be addressed first (choice C is incorrect).

While seeming straightforward conceptually, ==removal of the existing ET tube and insertion of a new ET tube over an airway exchange catheter (AEC)== is a procedure that ==carries substantial risk of complications==, particularly if performed blindly as implied in this case. The AEC is a long tube that is inserted within the existing ET tube. The distance of insertion can be difficult to determine with certainty, and there are reports of ==excessively distal placement of the tip== producing lung laceration and pneumothorax. If the original or new ET tube has a small internal diameter (ID) compared with the AEC outside diameter (OD), there is ==potential for the ET tube to become stuck on the AEC== as the ET tube is removed or inserted, respectively. This prolongs the period of absent ventilation and can lead to prolonged hypoxemia or loss of airway control. In contrast, a large ET tube ID compared with AEC OD can increase the likelihood that the ==tip of the new ET tube will become caught on the arytenoids or vocal cords== during ET tube insertion over the AEC. Additionally, some AECs are floppy and can coil or become displaced. Visualization by video or direct laryngoscopy during AEC-facilitated ET tube exchange offers additional control. Studies suggest video laryngoscopy is superior and is recommended (choice C is incorrect).

The position of the patient's head is worth considering as one examines the ET tube position within the trachea radiographically. With flexion and extension at the neck, the position of the ET tube tip can move 2 to 4 cm relative to the carina, with flexion advancing the tube distally (ie, the ET tube tip follows the chin, so chin down = ET tube tip down). Accordingly, a high ET tube position accompanied by flexed neck position raises the concern for accidental extubation if the neck is fully extended. As a corollary, an ET tube tip resting near the carina can progress to mainstem intubation with further flexion at the neck. Regardless of this patient's head position, the ET tube will be in a precarious position and adding more air to the cuff, and controlling agitation alone may be useful temporarily but will not resolve the situation (choice A is incorrect).[^1][^2][^3][^4][^5][^6]

[^1]: [[SEEK Questionnaires]]
[^2]: Budde AM, Kadar RB, Jabaley CS. Airway misadventures in adult critical care: a concise narrative review of managing lost or compromised artificial airways. _Curr Opin Anaesthesiol_. 2022;35(2):130-136. [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35131969)
[^3]: El-Orbany M, Salem MR. Endotracheal tube cuff leaks: causes, consequences, and management. _Anesth Analg_. 2013;117(2):428-434. [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23744958)
[^4]: Mort TC, Braffett BH. Conventional versus video laryngoscopy for tracheal tube exchange: glottic visualization, success rates, complications, and rescue alternatives in the high-risk difficult airway patient. _Anesth Analg_. 2015;121(2):440-448. [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26111264)
[^5]: Park SH, Han SH, Do SH, et al. The influence of head and neck position on the oropharyngeal leak pressure and cuff position of three supraglottic airway devices. _Anesth Analg_. 2009;108(1):112-117. [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19095838)
[^6]: Rudraraju P, Eisen LA. Confirmation of endotracheal tube position: a narrative review. _J Intensive Care Med_. 2009;24(5):283-292. [PubMed](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19654121)
